“Ms. Rowling of Edinburgh Scotland was proud
to say that she was a TERF, thank you very
much”.
*Sigh*
PART ONE: The Philosopher’s Denial
So here we are.
Honestly didn’t think I’d end up making
this video.
In fact I said in a few livestreams that I
wouldn’t.
But it’s just been nagging and nagging at
me.
I’d made my video about queer themes in
Harry Potter back in 2018, the halcyon days
of when you could give Joanne Rowling the
benefit of the doubt.
And boy did I ever give her the benefit of
the doubt.
And why wouldn’t I?
She was a powerful female author who used
her voice to raise money for charity and vocally
support marginalized communities.
Crimes of Grinldewald hadn’t even come out
yet, so I was flying high on the potential
for gay representation in the magical world.
Then the movie came out.
Then she started retweeting things.
Then she wrote the essay.
Then she wrote the book.
And on and on.
I don’t think I need to go into all the
gory details of Rowling’s descent into TERFism.
Contrapoints made a fantastic video doing
that, so just go watch that if you want an
actual trans person’s opinion.
I’m just a cis guy holding a grudge.
The TLDR version is that Rowling has spent
the last several years positioning herself
as TERF, (Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminist)
numero uno on the internet.
She’s been very good at doing that thing
we all associate with racists.
You know.
“I’m very good friends with trans people,
but…”
“I’m not transphobic, but…”
Now before some of ya’ll jump down my throat,
no I’m not calling her racist.
The way she codes certain characters of colour
in her books is… questionable, but she hasn’t
done anything out and out racist, as far as
I know.
Though her appropriation of native American
beliefs for Fantastic Beasts was… contentious.
No, she’s instead, been laser focused on
trans people.
It’s much safer to be transphobic than racist
these days anyway.
People might give you dirty looks, or even
stop talking to you if you’re too racist
too publicly.
At least in semi-civilized circles.
Same for homophobia, really.
Imagine if Rowling went full homophobe.
She’d have no choice but to write under
a psyudenum next time!
But not so when it comes to trans people.
Even a lot of people who support trans rights
aren’t willing to risk their social cache
on defending them, especially to someone like
Rowling.
Some celebrities, such as the younger cast
of the Harry Potter movies did come out and
declare “trans women are women”, which
is good.
Though the older actors all seem to be in
lockstep with Rowling’s more… conservative
point of view.
Some of the actors of the Fantastic Beasts
movies even came out against her transphobia.
But.
It’s not like they left the movies.
And before you say they couldn’t because
of contractual obligations… contracts between
actors and studios have Morality clauses.
That’s why Johnny Depp isn’t in Fantastic
Beasts anymore.
Studios can nullify contracts if an actor
does something morally reprehensible (Murder,
sexual assault, spousal abuse, etc), and actors
can nullify the contract if they believe producers
of a film are committing acts that go against
their own morals.
And since JK Rowling IS a producer on the
Fantastic Beasts movies, this leaves the actors
wide open to drop the franchise like the steaming
pile of mediocrity it is.
But they haven’t so to hell with them.
If box office numbers are any indication,
the franchise isn’t long for this world
anyway.
And don’t start with the “Crimes of Grindlewald
made 654 million dollars world wide, its a
success”.
No.
That movie had a 200 million dollar production
budget, plus over a hundred million in advertising
spend.
That’s three hundred million dollars spent.
The studio only gets , roughly, 50% of the
box office gross because theaters keep the
other 50% (Chinese theaters keep around 70%),
so Warner Bros made a profit of roughly 26
million dollars off that movie, if you’re
being generous.
A precipitous drop from the highs of the Harry
Potter franchise.
And since the next movie is going to be releasing
into a world where people may or may not be
comfortable going back to theatres, I can
only imagine it will be making even less.
How did this become a seminar on the minutea
of the film industry?
Back to Rowling.
I can’t wrap my head around how all of this
happened.
Honestly.
How this woman who wrote books that’s defined
my adolescence, and the adolescences of queer
people around the world, became so toxic?
How did she, so quickly, go from being the
author held up by millions as an example of
wokeness… to this?
It’s a long story.
See I discovered the books in 2001, just before
the first movie came out, and only about a
year after I myself came out.
Other than getting a rock off the back of
the head and some minor brain damage, nobody
really had a problem with my being gay.
But my god I was lonely.
Not only was I gay in a small town but I was
fat and gay in a small town.
I knew that even if I did manage to find other
gay people they probably wouldn’t want anything
to do with me.
So I escaped that shitty world for the magical
one she created.
Out of order, mind you.
I started with Prisoner of Azkaban, then Chamber
of Secrets, then Philosopher’s Stone, then
Goblet of Fire.
After that I read the books as they were released.
I was one of the kids who made his parents
drive him to a book store at midnight so he
could buy the newest entry in the adventures
of Harry, Hermione, and Ron.
I’m the one who started studying mythology
because of the off-hand references that Rowling
sprinkled throughout the books.
I was at every preview screening of the movies,
which was pretty hard to pull off living 40
minutes away from the nearest movie theatre.
But I was there.
Sometimes I was there all alone because my
parents were busy and my friends weren’t
into Harry Potter.
Growing up in a small town, I had next to
no exposure to anyone who wasn’t white,
straight, and catholic.
I never even met a black person until I was
sixteen.
So I could have come dangerously close to
becoming a close-minded bigot.
I certainly wouldn’t have been the only
one in the area.
But that didn’t happen.
Instead I was open to new ideas, new people
of different races and backgrounds.
People who saw the world differently than
me.
Who had different lived experiences than me.
Because I got to escape to Hogwarts.
Where being different didn’t mean you were
bad.
Where being weird meant you were special,
not deviant.
Where students of different races and nationalities
came together to bring down a villain hellbent
on destroying pluralism.
Who wanted the world to be exactly as he saw
it, and would kill anyone who stepped out
of line.
So because of seven books and eight movies,
I had my mind forced open to the fact that
people who are different from me are not less
than me.
Something I appreciated when I got to film
school and was surrounded by the types of
people I’d only ever seen on tv and in movie
up until then.
And I thanked Rowling for that.
She helped this lonely gay kid feel not so
alone, that there was a group of people out
there, somewhere, who would accept me.
Who would welcome me in and make me feel like
a part of something bigger than just my small
town.
And I thanked her for that by spending as
much money on Harry Potter merchandise as
I could.
I loved it all.
Different house scarves.
Lego.
Collectors edition sets of the books and movies.
Over-priced wands.
I was even saving up to pay an exorbitant
amount of money for tickets to see the Cursed
Child play before I read it and realized it
was horrible.
But it wasn’t written by Rowling, so that
explained everything!
As far as I was concerned everything she touched
was gold.
And then… things started to rust.
PART TWO: The Chamber of Anger
First came The Crimes of Grindlewald.
I don’t think I’ve ever given a movie
so much leeway.
Leading up to the release I, and many other
people, were incredibly excited to finally
get on screen confirmation of the relationship
between Dumbledore and Grindlewald, something
Rowling had confirmed after the release of
the final Harry Potter book.
And then the director said we wouldn’t be
getting it in this movie and then the movie
came out and… well, we didn’t get it.
But that was ok, I said.
We’d get it eventually.
And I fought with so many people on the internet
saying that “no no no, of course they weren’t
going to have Dumbledore and Grindlewald making
out in this movie.
They’d save that until the finale!
Movie 5.
Because that way you’d be less likely to
lose the family audience throughout the series.”
Nevermind that the script for Crimes of Grindlewald
was a disaster that absolutely reeked of first
draft sickness.
But I defended the movie and Rowling online
to no end.
I spent hours figuring out how they could
confirm the relationship between Grindlewald
and Dumbledore in some physical way that could
retain the PG-13 rating, and be easily removable
for markets like China and Russia.
I was invested in convincing other people
that they were wrong to criticize her.
That she was playing the game as best she
could.
After it was a box office disappointment,
I made the argument that it should go to a
streaming service, like Netflix or the eventually
announced HBO MAX.
Since HBO MAX doesn’t exist in, well, anywhere
outside the US, let alone in China and Russia,
you wouldn’t have to worry about the movie
being banned in countries with homophobic
governments.
And you wouldn’t have to worry about parents
groups losing their shit about gay wizards
because the HBO MAX subscription model had
already locked them in for a year or more.
And by the time it came up for renewal, they’d
have forgotten about it and stayed subscribed
for a DC show or a Game of Thrones show or
something.
But as I was busy defending her, and trying
to figure out ways Warner Media could make
money, she’d been busy doing other things.
Unfortunately, it wasn’t taking screenwriting
classes.
JK Rowling had been busy on Twitter.
Starting out simply by retweeting some transphobic
tweets that her PR representatives deemed
a “clumsy and middle-aged moment”.
I bought the spin of course, because how on
earth could the woman who helped ensure I
didn’t grow up to be a bigot be, well, a
bigot?
Obviously it was a mistake.
She hadn’t seen these people’s other,
way more transphobic tweets.
This happened right around the time that Lego
started releasing Harry Potter sets, including
a piece by piece recreation of Hogwarts.
So, of course, I bought each set immediately
upon release.
All the while defending her to gay friends
but, keeping quiet about her to my trans friends.
Underneath my adoration for her I was starting
to feel… embarrassed.
But it was easy enough to just keep buying
the merchandise, because the lego was being
released during a time when Rowling had mostly
disappeared from social media.
Taking a self imposed break after the backlash
that followed the initial retweets of transphobes.
Only popping up once and a while with cryptic
posts about upcoming projects, or confirming
fan theories about Harry Potter that she never
bothered to write into the books.
And then came the tweets.
They started relatively benign enough, with
Rowling being frustrated over the term “People
who menstruate”.
A term that’s trying to be inclusive of
certain trans men but just sounds… off.
In the right light it does sound a tad bit
dehumanizing, so I could see why people would
be put off by it.
Then she started retweeting loud and proud
TERFS like Maya Forstater and the shit completely
hit the fan.
When some of her followers criticized the
tweet as being off-color or even possibly
transphobic Rowling responded by saying:
“Dress however you please.
Call yourself whatever you like.
Sleep with any consenting adult who’ll have
you.
Live your best life in peace and security.
But force women out of their jobs for stating
that sex is real?”
Later saying:
“If sex isn’t real, there’s no same-sex
attraction.
If sex isn’t real, the lived reality of
women globally is erased.
I know and love trans people, but erasing
the concept of sex removes the ability of
many to meaningfully discuss their lives.
It isn’t hate to speak the truth.”
And out came the “If sex isn’t real”
argument.
This is something that TERFs love to do.
Equate sex and gender.
Either because their ignorant of the difference,
too dumb to tell, or just assholes.
Essentially, sex is biological in nature.
It’s determined on a chromosomal level.
Masculine and feminine sexual characteristics
are, for the most part determined by this.
I say for the most part because intersex people
also exist, despite what TERFs will admit,
and really ought to be included in the conversation.
Not everyone in the whole wide world fits
into the neat little binary of XX or XY chromosomes.
So sex is biological.
Immutable.
Whereas gender is a social construct.
Man and woman.
Something that a lot of people think is innate
in nature.
Even though for thousands of years there have
been third genders recognized all over the
world.
Non-binary genders.
In many places people who didn’t fit neatly
into the male or female category were considered
closer to god because of it.
But TERFs have a hard enough time wrapping
their head around the idea of someone born
into a feminine body transitioning, binarily,
into a masculine one.
Or vice versa.
Can you imagine their heads exploding at the
concept of not having to be male or female?
Wingardium Levi-o-shit!
On top of that, she used the argument that
“If sex isn’t real, there’s no same
sex attraction”.
The loudest dog whistle in the world to try
and pit cisgender gays and lesbians against
trans people.
Almost threatening us that “If you let transgender
be a thing, that completely delegitimizes
everything you’ve fought for”.
It doesn’t.
She was just trying to win over some allies.
And then she doubled down, and tripled down,
and quadrupled down until finally publishing
a thousand page detective novel with a serial
killer who dresses up like a woman in order
to ubduct and murder them.
I mean I know she’s well known for pulling
themes and creatures from mythology for Harry
Potter, but did she have to pull out a lazy
thriller trope that’s even older than she
is?
That was played out before the first Harry
Potter book was published.
Silence of the Lambs did this and is one of
the best movies ever made.
You’re not going to do better.
And you know you’re not going to do it better.
So why try?
Could it be that you’re delusional enough
to think that you can write a thriller that’s
better than Silence of the Lambs?
Or, maybe, are you doing it because you have
an agenda?
It’s the second one, btw.
In case I’m being too subtle.
PART THREE: The Prisoner of Gender
But how did this happen?
How did the woman who told an entire generation
of kids that being their true selves is good,
and the right thing… end up doing a 180
and completely disavowing a whole group of
people just trying to live their lives?
I mean it came as a hell of a shock to me
but it wasn’t all that shocking to people
who know what’s going on in current mainstream
British feminism.
An anti-trans strain of feminism has always
simmered under the surface, but it’s really
come to light over the last few years in England,
especially after the proposed changes to the
nation’s Gender Recognition Act.
The Gender Recognition Act, a law put on the
books in 2004, sets up the legal process for
trans people to change their legal gender
on their birth certificates.
Because at the time that decision was not
made by you, or your doctor, but by an anonymous
group of beurocrats.
In 2017, the government announced a possible
reform that would let trans people make a
legal declaration that they pledged to live
the rest of their lives as their transitioned
gender.
But there was a hell of a lot of backlash
from TERFs, people who generally hate trans
people, and the very transphobic English press
who had a habit of running stories with dead
names.
These reporters falsely claimed that allowing
trans people to “self-ID” meant that a
person could declare themselves a man on Monday
and a woman on Friday, allowing rapists to
gain access to women’s only spaces like
bathrooms and changing rooms.
Now, I’ve never been sexually assaulted,
but I do know a disturbing amount of women
who have.
I’ve been the one taking them to the hospital,
the cops, or the counciling sessions.
And something I’ve discovered through all
of this is… rapists don’t go through that
much effort.
They just do it.
It’s a power thing.
Men who believe they’re more powerful than
women are not going to dress up as a woman
in order to assault her.
They’re too lazy for that, don’t give
them that much credit.
But I digress.
The campaign of lies in the press soon moved
on to spread more lies, now about trans children.
That kids were being forced to transition
by ultra-woke parents and experimental doctors.
As a result, a large proportion of mainstream
British feminists started loudly proclaiming
that it’s not possible to change biological
sex.
Always ALWAYS focusing on biology and not
sociology.
No one, to my knowledge, has claimed that
a trans person can change their chromosomal
sex.
Only in a perfect world.
BUT, one can change their gender, because
that is simply how you are perceived by society.
Lavern Cox may have an X and a Y chromosome,
but if you’re lucky enough to see her walking
down the street, you’re not thinking anything
but woman.
Meanwhile, in most mainstream North American
feminist circles, speaking out against trans
women and men is not considered feminism at
all.
It’s considered being a dick head.
But trans-exclusionary radical feminist (TERF)
ideology has been helped along in the UK by
false media campaigns lead by the likes of
Rupert Murdoch, the Australian billionaire
who birthed Fox News.
Any opposition to gender-critical or TERF
thought in the UK brings accusations of “silencing
women”, leading to Australian TERF Sheila
Jeffreys going before the UK Parliament in
March of 2018 to declare that trans women
“parasites,”.
Charming.
vox.com reported that According to , who studies
the modern gender-critical movement, gender-critical
feminism in the UK grew out of a toxic mix
of historical imperialism, and any concept
that looks at gender as anything but biologically
determined.
Those who rose to prominence in the movement
did so through “Call out culture”, attacking
trans men and women online.
Declaring trans women to be male perverts,
and trans men to be lost lesbian sisters.
Nevermind that trans men can also be gay or
bisexual.
Another fact TERFS don’t like acknowledging.
“Anti-trans feminists think they have science
on their side,” Greensmith said.
“It is bananas how ascientific their rhetoric
is, and yet literally they say, ‘Biology
isn’t bigotry.’
In fact, biology has been used as bigotry
as long as biology has been a thing.”
Biology has been used to hold people down
for thousands of years.
Holding down women, people of color - You
name a non-white-male group and biology has
been used to bring the boot down on them at
some point.
And the biology narrative has only grown in
the UK.
TERFism has become so prevalent there that
many liberal pundits even blamed the conservative
Tory victory in the last parliamentary election
on trans people, saying that trans issues
are just a hyper-woke product of a political
left that has simply gone too far.
BREXIT was even blamed on trans people.
Donald Trump’s election win in 2016 was
blamed on trans people!
By British people!
So English feminists, of which JK Rowling
considers herself a proud member, were already
at a tipping point when Maya Forstater sued
the Centre for Global Development, a non-profit
think tank that decided not to renew her expiring
contract when they discovered that she’d
been spreading TERFY shit all over the internet.
After a hearing with a UK employment tribunal,
Judge James Tayler (good name) ruled that
Forstater’s gender-critical views did not
represent a legally protected philosophical
belief.
He said:
“I consider that the Claimant’s view,
in its absolutist nature, is incompatible
with human dignity and [the] fundamental rights
of others.”
That’s when the “Dress however you please”
tweet came out, and it’s just been downhill
ever since.
Including publishing an overly long essay
basically explaining why she thinks trans
people aren’t valid.
Mostly has to do with bathrooms, because of
course it does.
One person replied to her tweets, writing:
“As a physician, I want people to know that
sex exists on a bimodal biological spectrum
just like gender exists on a bimodal sociological
spectrum.
While most identify as either female or male,
there are intersex and trans individuals whose
identities are just as valid and real.”
Rowling proceeded to block them.
And ever since then she has been more than
happy to spout off about her ignorant beliefs
whenever given the chance.
Like in her 3600 word blog, “TERF Wars”.
Oh she’s so funny.
“TERF Wars” aha ha ha ha
PART FOUR: The Goblet of Bargaining
In the blog, Rowling writes about her struggles
with sexism and misogyny, adding that reading
accounts of gender dysphoria in trans men
had made her wonder “if I’d been born
30 years later, I too might have tried to
transition”.
Also writing: “Many, myself included, believe
we are watching a new kind of conversion therapy
for young gay people, who are being set on
a lifelong path of medicalization.”
Some readers took this as her actually comparing
gender confirming therapies to gay conversion
therapy, which has been labeled torture by
many psychological professionals.
You didn’t have to stretch very far to see
the comparison.
Her response to this was:
“I’ve ignored fake tweets attributed to
me and RTed widely.
I’ve ignored porn tweeted at children on
a thread about their art.
I’ve ignored death and rape threats.
I’m not going to ignore this.”
Well at least she’s got her priorities straight.
Then she signed an open letter condemning
cancel culture.
The billionaire author who lives in a castle
and was about to have another book hit #1
on the New York Times Best Seller list…
complaining about being cancelled.
Warner Bros official statement regarding her
repeated infractions was:
Couldn’t use the word transgender once,
huh?
I mean they might have well said, “we believe
in people” for how much sense and genuine
emotion this statement had.
But, Warner Bros hasn’t been known for making
a lot of sense lately.
There has been some backlash, mostly from
queer inclusive groups.
But the most interesting response has actually
been from the fans.
To a very large extent, fans of Harry Potter
have been beside themselves… ourselves,,,
with her actions.
While some just wish she’d stop, and go
back to the Rowling we thought we knew and
loved… many are not afraid of letting her
know how they feel on social media.
And it’s gotten under her skin too.
She threatened to sue some people for calling
her a bigot on Twitter, and apparently hasn’t
spoken to Emma Watson since the actress posted
this photo of herself on Instagram with a
shirt declaring “Trans rights are human
rights”.
The thing is though, Rowling is pretty insulated
from most negativity toward her.
She’s surrounded herself with fellow TERFs
who agree with her.
She’s fabulously wealthy.
If she didn’t make one more single solitary
penny for the rest of her life, her family
could live in luxury for centuries.
I mean she lives in a literal castle.
So she couldn’t care less if people are
angry with her about her opinion on trans
people.
She’s got money.
She’s got influence.
Her books are still #1 bestsellers, even when
her name isn’t on them.
Funnily enough, book wise, she’s been careful
with her name.
The book about the cross dressing serial killer
was published under her non-de-plum, Robert
Galbraith, creating a little layer of insulation
for her, at least among the uninformed.
Her name, these days, only gets branded onto
things that have to do with Wizards, but even
that isn’t set in stone.
When the first Fantastic Beasts movie came
out the branding behind it was “JK Rowling’s
Wizarding World”.
But by the time the sequel hit theatres it
was just “Wizarding World”.
And that’s how it’s stayed ever since.
Back in 2018 she’d already started in with
the so called “Middle aged moments” by
retweeting people calling trans women “men
in dresses”.
So I wouldn’t be surprised if Warner Bros,
who own a massive stake in the Harry Potter
brand, had a hand in removing her name from
the series branding.
Not because they’re so trans friendly, but
because they didn’t want to risk it becoming
a public relations issue.
And for the most part, it worked.
People, even those in the queer community,
still love Harry Potter.
Despite Rowling.
People have been able to separate the author
from the creation so that they can continue
to enjoy the world she created without supporting
her personally.
This was my take on things as late as last
summer.
To some extent I guess it still is.
If I had completely disowned her creations
I probably wouldn’t have a thousand dollars
worth of Hogwarts lego.
But the TERF wars article kind of broke me.
I couldn’t pretend that supporting her creations
wasn’t supporting her anymore.
I started coming at this a bit differently
than a lot of people, especially my fellow
cis people.
I’ve found that trans folks are far more
willing to drop her and everything she’s
created, which makes a lot of sense.
She’s been using her vast influence to hurt
the trans community for years now.
But I also have some trans friends who have
actually gotten tattoos of the deathly hallows
or harry’s glasses just to spite her.
Because they love the wizarding world.
It helped them feel accepted at a time when
they couldn’t even accept themselves and
they’ll be damned if they’re going to
let her take that away from them.
It’s a really weird situation all around.
The way I’ve come to looking at it is…
I can’t spend another dime on branded Harry
Potter merchandise.
Even though there’s some lego sets I desperately
want.
But plenty of people, even trans people, disagree
with me on that.
You see, things like lego and action figures
and scarves and puzzles and video games…
companies signed licenses for those things
long before she went full TERF, at least publicly.
They could use the morality clause in their
contracts to sever ties with her, but they’ve
spent so much money on the products already
that the projected loss of revenue would have
their stockholders abandoning ship.
One could argue that buying the merchandise
though just reinforces companies willingness
to work with transphobes.
That they can work with TERFs and bigots because,
when it comes to the trans community, it won’t
mean any lost sales.
But from another point of view, NOT buying
Harry Potter stuff because she’s apparently
a rabid bigot is really only hurting the companies
producing the products.
Because she already got paid when the contract
was signed.
She doesn’t get royalties from sales, she
gets an upfront licensing fee.
Take for instance the upcoming Hogwarts Legacy
video game from Avalanche Studios.
They’re a great little studio that have
made a lot of fun games over the years.
Their bread and butter was actually doing
video games for Disney, like the super fun
Disney Infinity series, but they almost had
to close when Disney shuttered Disney Interactive.
The companies and its employees were pretty
much left out to dry until they lucked out
and got the chance to work on Hogwarts Legacy
in 2017, saving the company from bankruptcy.
A year before JK Rowling made the first “men
in dresses” retweet.
And Avalanche, to their credit, has made it
VERY clear that Rowling has absolutely NO
involvement with the game’s development.
So, if you’re interested in the game, and
you want to play it when it eventually gets
released, is it fair to boycott it because
of the rotten things Rowling has said?
I don’t have the answer to that, but it’s
a question worth asking.
Because there is a very valid argument that
says the by buying Harry Potter merchandise,
you’re not necessarily making her richer,
since she’s already been paid for it, but
that you’re continuing to make her relevant.
And her being relevant to the cultural conversation
gives her power and influence.
A lot more power and influence than her just
being rich.
A lot of people make the argument that buying
Wizarding World merch is putting more money
in her pocket.
A fair argument but…
She’s already so rich that taking a few
sales away from her will have a net zero effect
on her life.
But if you love Harry Potter, if it means
something to you, removing it from your life
entirely might actually have an effect on
you.
Because for many of us, Harry Potter represents
something more than just a book we read as
kids or teens.
It became a part of our identity because it
exists in a very rarified place of cultural
importance.
Formative literature.
PART FIVE: The Order of Foundations
Formative Bigotry
You may have noticed that this is a bit of
a sore spot for me, and that given that I’m
a self-identified Harry Potter fan or a…
recovering Harry Potter fan.
Or a…
Harry Potter fan in remission?
[Shrugs]
Anyway, this isn’t me blasting Rowling because
I’m trying to hide the fact that I love
the franchise in order to make it seem like
I’m publicly distancing myself from her
and it.
The point is that I’m getting so flustered
over this not because I’m putting on airs,
but because I've kind of taken it personally.
how all of this has gone.
Or rather, I feel kind of personally attacked.
By Rowling.
Like she went out of her way to whip me into
a defensive frenzy to absolve her of any perceived
wrongdoing.
Specifically me.
But then I have to ask myself.
Why is it that I, at the time, and others
who — to this day — continue to defend
Rowling against all criticism?
I mean I jumped ship when she said the quiet
part loudly enough, even then I might have
held out for longer than I should have.
But why do people still defend her when she’s
shown her true colours?
And not even the turfy-kinda veneration of
her gender critical beliefs, or people who
dismiss the issue altogether, but why do so
many people still continue to argue that she
isn’t, in fact, transphobic?
Why go through the mental gymnastics of explaining
how her poorly-edited, gender-critical tirades
are in fact not only reasonable, but in fact
trans-inclusive?
She gives them a reason to, though.
To this day JK Rowling continues to insist
that she loves and respects trans people.
But i think she feels that trans gender identity
is this kind of variant of an assigned birth
gender?
Kinda like a trans-woman exists as a variant
of man, and vice versa.
And she’s made it clear she’s willing
to love and support that.
As long as trans women continue to identify
as men, she’s on board for that.
I can see her as one of those white women
who insist that drag is cultural appropriation
of women.
The thing is, love and support is Rowling’s
brand.
That’s kind of the identifiable niche she
carved out for herself, not only by making
Hogwards visually diverse — if a little
stereotypical to the point of ignorance — but
the brazen theme of the books is diversity.
And she kept that rolling through her correspondence
with both the press and her audience.
I couldn't help but wonder... why is it that
her fandom clung to this brand for as long
as they did?
And… is there anything she could do to stick
the last nail in the coffin of her own career.
The thing with Rowling and Harry Potter is
that these are children’s books.
While at the same time it was accessible,
it also didn’t talk down to it’s audience
and laid out character intentions and feelings
that were easy to understand for children
but complex enough to keep older readers engaged.
And this isn’t to absolve Rowling of wrongdoing
because she wrote a good book.
Yegch.
That bothers me a lot.
When people who don’t like Rowling stack
on and act like the Harry Potter books are
trash either because she’s trash or because
the books are popular.
But Harry Potter is also… well… kind of
a special case as far as book series go.
At the time, nothing like it had ever happened
before.
It STARTED as a children’s book… and then
grew up with the audience.
First, finding a niche in that young adult
period, and then by book seven kind of even
reached toward the New Adult genre.
not only did these books generate a paradigm
shift in the publishing industry, but they
did so while managing to keep a group of children
interested in a series well into their teens
or even twenties.
When it comes to serialized children’s literature,
young readers who follow the series usually
drop it as they grow out of the content.
It isn’t until the series comes to a completion
that you get an audience who can read the
entire backlog at once while they’re still
young.
So… if harry potter had stayed as child-focused
as it started, then a lot of us probably would
have cut and run before book five.
Especially before book five.
But Harry Potter grew up with us.
And we got to see the complexity of the books
unfold as our own lives were becoming more
complex and independent.
So not only was Harry Potter beloved to our
childhood, but also our mid-and later teenage
years — depending on how old you were when
you started reading it.
And for those who had the opportunity to read
the whole series at once, you could see a
very… realistic progression of a developing
teenage identity.
So in either case, the books stick with you,
and so you stick with the book from beginning
to end.
And in the process of being involved with
a series for seven instalments, that’s a
lot of time and thought devoted to processing
this media.
Critically, at a period in your life where
you do not have a super developed capacity
for critical thinking.
At the same time that you are able to recognize
the morals of the story, you cannot recognize
the way that this narration is conditioning
you to act a certain way.
And these morals are so very clearly directed
at cooperation, acceptance of the other, and
the strength and importance of the individual
existing within a community.
We see those values and we like those values.
So, until some of us are conditioned into
Randian, personal-gain, kind of objectivist
thinking, we do lean towards inclusion as
an innate state of default.
We don’t understand the social constructs
of why person from Racist group A can’t
interact with person from diverse group B.
This kind of segregation, as many have remarked,
is learned behaviour.
So the inclusive values in Harry Potter feel
natural to us as children.
And because most children don’t understand
the history of the IRA, and the colonial occupation
of Ireland, they aren’t going to be able
to critically discern WHY it’s a little
problematic that the ONLY Irish student at
Hogwarts is constantly making things explode.
Same thing with the goblins.
We LEARN about the Holocaust and antisemitism
and stereotypes around Jewish people.
So we do not have the innate ability to think
critically about the depiction of Goblins
being disturbingly close to how the Nazis
portrayed Jewish people in propaganda.
Instead, we let this media shape us.
Because a) we like it and b) it speaks to
values that we internally hold as truths.
But we also do not have the ability to critically
think in a way where we can accept media and
separate the values we like from the values
we dislike.
It’s either all good, or all bad.
And quite frankly, a lot of adults are not
that well versed in critical thought either.
So as we accept Harry Potter as a component
of our formative development of values and
worldview, it, essentially, becomes a component
of our identities.
And Harry Potter especially, because it was
produced and presented to the public on the
cusp of an era.
The year after the deathly hallows was released
the stock market crashed.
Many of us immediately started getting called
lazy, expecting handouts, entitled, wanting
a trophy for showing up.
Before then We were told that if we just did
what we loved, everything would work out.
We were told that fulfilment was the most
important part of getting a career.
And that money wasn’t as important as happiness.
…And then we were told to take that job
at starbucks, getting berated and verbally
abused by customers, and we were told to be
grateful we had anything at all.
Our complaints about student debt fell on
deaf ears from generations who, when they
were younger, started out with ‘nothing’
and made something of themselves.
In an age where they could get a family-supporting
job with a high school diploma.
In an age where you could work part time and
put yourself through school, when minimum
wage was high enough and tuition was low enough
to do that.
I for one, would have loved to start with
‘nothing’ rather than a heap of debt from
a degree I couldn’t really use to get that
fulfilment I was promised.
Everything didn’t just ‘work out’ because
we followed our dreams.
In fact… we were told to… put our dreams
on hold.
Or that we should just make it a hobby.
Or just… wait until retirement.
Or just realize that everyone doesn’t get
to be an astronaut and we should just settle
for being a barista.
Not speaking from personal experience, my
parents were incredibly encouraging.
But many of us who had degrees and jobs at
starbucks had parents who thought that because
we didn’t have a job in our field it just
meant that we weren’t looking for them.
So many of our role models turned their backs
on us, and refused to listen to the reality
of our situation.
Because it didn’t match up with what it
was like ‘when they were our age.’
And according to them, the world, apparently,
was incapable of change.
By the time our role models realized that…
no… there isn’t just this trove of jobs
out there, waiting for resumes dropped off
to the manager with a wink and a handshake.
By that time… we’d stopped caring what
they thought.
We pushed away from our role models who built
up our expectations and did nothing to admit
that maybe… this wasn’t our fault.
…Except JK Rowling.
Who, famously, came from poverty and obscurity,
living in public housing, on social assistance,
getting fired from jobs because she was working
on her manuscript.
Facing rejection, mental illness, abusive
people, her own role models, who did not believe
in her and in spite of all of it, she force
fed their words back to them and founded a
creative empire on a dream and a little creativity.
She proved to us that our dreams were possible,
while telling us that the problems we complained
about were valid, and we had every right to
be angry.
And we had every right to keep dreaming.
Harry Potter was formative to our values,
and JK Rowling, now in the public eye, told
us that we didn’t have to abandon those
values to ‘fit in’ with what our once-mentors
told us we had to be.
What we had to sacrifice in order to succeed.
Without realizing that success, by their standards,
didn’t exist anymore, except for a few exceptions.
So, not only the books, but she herself was
formative in how we held on to our identity
through a crisis nobody believed was happening.
And so no, people don’t want to admit she
did anything wrong.
To admit that she herself could turn into
an icon of the kind of wrong-minded, bigoted,
exclusionary, out-of-touch, ignorant, hateful,
tone-deaf, and unwilling to learn and grow
and develop and accept new things, new ways
of thinking.
To admit that she had become everything that
would have told her she would never succeed,
that we would never succeed…
I got to admit, I’m not sure how that works.
Which is why we held on to Rowling for so
long.
Which is why I held on to that initial variant
of Rowling, the one that cut through hatred
and resistance so that people could flourish.
Because that was the Rowling that we accepted.
So the new version… that must just be a
mistake.
There must be a reason for that.
Because these two versions are incompatible.
It’s… almost impossible to get someone
to remove something that they consider to
be part of their identity.
Not like it’s their fault, human beings
are built to think that way.
Our consciousness is designed to identify
itself by things that feel familiar.
The opposite is what?
Cognitive dissonance?
We HAVE to hold on to what we identify with.
And if that thing is some rags to riches British
author... we have less agency in shaping ourselves
than we think.
And that’s especially true at younger ages
because we don’t realize that this fun book
we’re reading is actually shaping our entire
identity.
Which like… really should scare the shit
out of authors of Young Adult and Children’s
literature.
I mean you are developing a one-way line of
communication direct with a small person’s
subconscious.
And… they WILL absorb all the subliminal
messaging in there.
Whether it’s intended to be there or not.
And that can stay with them for their entire
life.
In the instance of Harry Potter, the value
on the surface is so strongly associated with
inclusion, we give it the benefit of the doubt.
Because… we are biased creatures.
And in many cases We aren’t aware of what
those biases are.
For instance, it’s not likely that Tolkein
deliberately intended to code th forces of
Mordor as representatives of dark-skinned
individuals.
He was trying to establish a dichotomy between
darkness and light, and didn’t understand,
and did not live in an era where it was projected
that skin colour ought to be treated sensitively.
And because Tolkein never did something that
was like… errantly hateful, most people
can separate the surface value meaning from
the problematic instances.
And I thought, for a while, that I could do
that with Harry Potter.
You know, just kinda… remove Rowling’s
gender politics and enjoy what was in the
rest of the books.
But now it just hangs off my back.
Weighing down the love I have for her creation.
And killing the admiration I had for her.
PART SIX: The Half-Depressed Prince
Every September 1, people around the world
celebrate the day that students go to Hogwarts,
with many proclaiming on social media “It’s
time to go home”.
It’s almost reached religious levels of
devotion, with some fans making the pilgrimage
to Kings Cross Station, congregating at the
little sign in between platforms nine and
ten, and counting down to when the train leaves
at 11:00am sharp.
Others opt to travel to Universal Studios,
where they can wander around Diagon Alley,
being fitted for their robes, receiving their
very own wand, and then casting their gaze
toward the reproduction of Hogwarts that looms
high above the land.
I never really got to partake in any of that,
mind you.
I didn’t have the money to travel to London
for September 1, or to go to Universal Studios
and visit Diagon Alley.
Not in time, anyway.
Not before Rowling… did the things.
There’s even a head canon reason why fans
of a certain generation, mine, never got their
letters to go to Hogwarts.
Because of Voldemort’s power grab in the
seventh book, all documentation tracking muggles
with magical powers was destroyed.
And therefor, after 1997, no eleven year old
without wizard parents got their letters.
It’s a silly and fun way to let the magical
idea of Hogwarts live on.
That we actually are witches and wizards,
we just didn’t get our letters because a
mad fascist didn’t want us included.
And In 2012, Harry Potter fans around the
world cheered Britain’s then Prime Minister
David Cameron’s declaration that May 2 would
forevermore be known as International Harry
Potter Day.
Why May 2?
The Battle of Hogwarts was fought on this
date in 1998.
The final conflict of the Second Wizarding
War.
The Order of the Phoenix proved victorious,
ending the most devastating battle of that
war and resulting in numerous casualties,
including Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, Lavender
Brown, Colin Creavey, Severus Snape, and Fred
Weasley.
But most notably the defeat of Lord Voldemort,
or Tom Riddle.
Every year brings different ways to commemorate
and celebrate this day.
There are anniversaries to recognize, characters
to memorialize, places to see.
In Cameron’s official statement announcing
the new holiday he said “In order to fully
commemorate and immortalize her work, we have
decided to officially declare May 2nd as an
official international holiday, in honor of
the date that protagonist Harry Potter conquered
the main antagonist of the series, Lord Voldemort.
We hope that children and adults alike will
be reminded of Harry Potter’s strong and
courageous character on this day, as well
as of the true credit that Ms. Rowling has
made to society.”
In case you can’t tell, this is not the
typical.
This isn’t usually what people do after
a book series has ended.
It’s become something beyond its creator.
JK Rowling gets the credits for all of this,
in an official sense, being the creator.
But she didn’t organize the pilgrimages
to Kings Cross.
She hasn’t been the one keeping the series
alive with countless theory videos and head
canon explanations across the internet.
She just confirms them sometimes.
And when she comes up with her own, its about
Wizards crapping on the ground and magicking
it away with their wand.
The fans are the people who have kept this
brand alive since the books finished their
run in 2007, the year I graduated from high
school, and the final film was released in
2011.
Long before Rowling officially launched Pottermore
in 2015, (everything before then was considered
a beta), fans had been doing the hard work
of keeping their favourite characters alive.
Fans took ownership of the the characters.
Fan fiction communities for Harry Potter had
always been popular, but they really took
off once the series had finished.
People were telling their own stories in the
world.
Creating their own characters.
Adding to the mythology.
And a whole lot of the people behind those
new stories were queer and trans.
People who understood that Rowling couldn’t
include people like us in the initial books
because of the then existing UK law that said
books with LGBT characters weren’t allowed
in children’s libraries.
So we assumed that was the only reason we
weren’t there, and many of us created out
own stories to fill in the gaps.
Creating new characters to exist right alongside
Harry, Ron, and Hermione.
And why wouldn’t we?
In 2014 JK Rowling stated, very clearly, that
gay, lesbian, bi, AND transgender students
could, of course, attend Hogwarts.
She even said that they may use magic to help
deal with gender confirmation.
She didn’t use those exact words of course,
instead clinically stating that one could
change their genitals, but the meaning was
still there.
So It’s no wonder her being a TERF came
like a punch to the gut to so many.
And why so many people, myself very much included,
preferred to ignore her slights on Twitter
until it became impossible to do so.
Until she went out of her way to remove that
last shadow of a doubt that so many of us
clung to.
And it sucks.
I hate it.
I hate that I defended her.
I hate that I ignored her growing transphobia.
But most of all, I hate that I had to.
I hate that she put me and so many fans, gay,
straight, bi, cis, trans, non-binary…
That she put us in the position of HAVING
to ignore her ignorant and potentially dangerous
comments.
Because she had helped us form our identities
as accepting, loving, people.
The ones who would help the first years at
Hogwarts feel comfortable in their new home.
No matter where they came from, what they
looked like, or what dormitory they slept
in.
Over the course of just a few short years
Joanne Rowling went from being the most tolerant,
accepting, loving professor at Hogwarts…
to She Who Must Not Be Named.
And while doing so she created her own hoard
of TERFY death eaters to go along with her,
leaving the rest of us heartbroken at the
betrayal, and trying to figure out what to
do next.
Do we cut Harry Potter out of our lives.
Or just it’s creator?
Do we have to let go of something that made
us feel so happy and safe?
Or can we just let go of her?
Can there be Harry Potter without JK Rowling?
PART SEVEN: The Deathly Acceptance
(At desk with Harry Potter perch everywhere)
I’ve been asking myself that question at
least once a week for the last year and a
half.
Can I still enjoy Harry Potter, even though
JK Rowling is who, it turns out, she is.
Can I still read the books?
Watch the movies?
Play a video game?
Buy lego.
Can I play with my wands?
I have Slytherin and Ravenclaw scarves and
this past winter, on the very rare occasion
I got to leave the house, I felt like I couldn’t
wear them.
What about my Hogwarts backpack?
Can I still use that without feeling like
I’m promoting TERF ideology?
I know that for people for whom Harry Potter
was just another book or movie, this probably
sounds crazy.
I feel like it would be akin to Marvel fans
finding out that Stan Lee was secretly fighting
against civil rights in America, or that George
Lucas secretly financed the January 6th attack
on the capital.
It’s just so antithetical to the image we
have of these people.
But luckily, in reality, Stan Lee was a pretty
progressive guy who loved adding diversity
to the Marvel Comics universe.
And George Lucas abhors fascism, in case the
bad guys in Star Wars being space nazis was
too subtle for you.
But how does someone deal with discovering
that a person who helped them develop their
identity is… bad?
People who read Orson Scott Card books as
a kid had to do it when they founds out he
was actually a raging homophobe.
HP Lovecraft was a virulent racist and anti-semite…
but his world has been adopted since his death,
with countless Jewish writer and writers of
color making his mythos safe for everyone.
So it’s not a new phenomena.
But certainly nothing like it has happened
at this scale.
No modern author has had the reach of JK Rowling.
The cultural permeability.
Harry Potter has sold over 500 million copies.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone
is the bestselling single novel of all time.
With the other six books in the series all
landing within the top 20 bestselling books
of all time.
Rowling is the only author to have more than
one book in that top twenty, and she’s got
seven.
That has lead to a level of global cultural
osmosis never before seen in literature.
For some kids it was just another book they
read, or movie they saw.
But for many it changed how they looked at
the world.
It gave them a safe place to go when the real
world was falling apart around them.
There are reports of young Syrian refugees
and South American migrants clutching onto
copies of Harry Potter books as they flee
from the horrors of war or destitution.
Because although bombs fall around them, and
gunshots ring throughout the night…
Hogwarts makes them feel safe.
And so I don’t think we can demand people
give that up.
As I’ve said already, I know more than a
few trans people who have increased their
love of Harry Potter to spite Rowling.
To show her and the people who support her
that they cannot take this away from them.
That Harry, and Hagrid, and Hermione, and
Ron, and the other Weaselys, mean something
to them.
That Neville and Luna and Cho and Dean were
their friends when, maybe, they had none.
That Molly Weasly was a loving and accepting
mother figure.
That Professor McDonagall was a teacher they
wish they’d had to talk to.
If you want to cut this out of your life because
of the things Rowling has said, I do not blame
you at all.
With countries all over the world passing
anti-trans laws, adding her voice to the mix
has only fanned the flames of transphobia.
But if you want to keep these characters and
this world in your life to spite her, I support
that too.
Because the minute those books hit the bookshelves
they became just as much the fan’s property
as her own.
She might legally own them, but a brand is
nothing without the fans.
There’s an entire generation of people who
grew up escaping to Hogwarts.
Who feel comfortable and safe within those
walls… within the pages of the books…
or the scenes of the movies.
I’m one of them.
And honestly, I’m not letting her have the
power to take that away from me.
Will I spend anymore money on the brand?
Probably not.
But I’m not letting it go entirely.
I accept that she is not who I thought she
was.
But the beautiful thing about books is that,
for the most part, they’re unchanging.
Harry still comes from an abusive home, and
finds his security in a chosen family.
Hermione still fights for the rights of the
oppressed, even though they’re different
from her.
Molly Weasely is still the mother figure that
will hug you and care for you, no matter what.
Sirius is still the godfather that will make
you laugh, and put his life on the line for
you.
Dobby is still the devoted friend.
McGonagall still the caring teacher.
Hagrid still the father figure that will guide
you through the dark.
They’re all still there within the pages
and on the screen.
Inside a worn paperback or old DVD you got
as a kid or a teenager.
And on September 1, you can still return to
Hogwarts without putting a single Knut, sickle,
or galleon in Rowling’s pocket.
Rowling did her job.
She wrote the books.
But They’re yours now.
Always.